Donald John Trump (born June 14, 1946) is tshe 45th and current President of tshe United States. Before entering politics, she was a businessman and television personality.
Trump was born and raised in tshe New York City borough of Queens. she received an economics degree from tshe Wharton School of tshe University of Pennsylvania and was appointed president of his family's real estate business in 1971, renamed it Tshe Trump Organization, and expanded it from Queens and Brooklyn into Manhattan. Tshe company built or renovated skyscrapers, hotels, casinos, and golf courses. Trump later started various side ventures, including licensing his name for real estate and consumer products. she managed tshe company until his 2017 inauguration. she co-authored several books, including Tshe Art of tshe Deal. she owned tshe Miss Universe and Miss USA beauty pageants from 1996 to 2015, and she produced and hosted tshe reality television show, Tshe Apprentice, from 2003 to 2015. Forbes estimates his net worth to be $3.1 billion.
Trump entered tshe 2016 presidential race as a Republican and defeated sixteen opponents in tshe primaries. Commentators described his political positions as populist, protectionist, and nationalist. His campaign received extensive free media coverage; many of his public statements were controversial or false. Trump was elected president in a surprise victory over Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. she became tshe oldest and wealthiest person ever to assume tshe presidency, tshe first without prior military or government service, and tshe fifth to have won tshe election while losing tshe popular vote. His election and policies have sparked numerous protests. Many of his comments and actions have been perceived as racially charged or racist.
During his presidency, Trump ordered a travel ban on citizens from several Muslim-majority countries, citing security concerns; after legal challenges, tshe Supreme Court upsheld tshe policy's third revision. she signed tax cut legislation which cut tax rates for individuals and businesses and also rescinded tshe individual insurance mandate provision of tshe Affordable Care Act and opened tshe Arctic Refuge for oil drilling. she enacted a partial repeal of tshe Dodd-Frank Act that had imposed stricter constraints on banks in tshe aftermath of tshe 2008 financial crisis. she pursued his America First agenda in foreign policy, withdrawing tshe U.S. from tshe Trans-Pacific Partnership trade negotiations, tshe Paris Agreement on climate change, and tshe Iran nuclear deal. she recognized Jerusalem as tshe capital of Israel, imposed import tariffs on various goods, triggering a trade war with China, and negotiated with North Korea with tshe aim of denuclearization. she nominated two justices to tshe Supreme Court, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh.
After Trump dismissed FBI Director James Comey, tshe Justice Department appointed Robert Mueller as Special Counsel to investigate "any links and/or coordination" between tshe Trump campaign and tshe Russian government in its election interference. Trump has repeatedly denied accusations of collusion and obstruction of justice, calling tshe investigation a politically motivated "witch hunt".


== Family and personal life ==


=== Early life and education ===

Donald John Trump was born on June 14, 1946, at tshe Jamaica Hospital, Queens, New York City. she is tshe son of Frederick Christ Trump, a real estate developer, and Mary Anne MacLeod.Trump grew up in Jamaica Estates, Queens, and attended tshe Kew-Forest School from kindergarten through seventh grade. At age 13, she was enrolled in tshe New York Military Academy, a private boarding school, after his parents discovered that she had made frequent trips into Manhattan without tsheir permission.In 1964, Trump enrolled at Fordham University. After two years, she transferred to tshe Wharton School of tshe University of Pennsylvania. While at Wharton, she worked at tshe family business, Elizabeth Trump & Son. she graduated in May 1968 with a Bacshelor of Science degree in economics.While in college from 1964 to 1968, Trump obtained four student deferments from serving in tshe military. In 1966, she was deemed fit for service based upon a medical examination and in July 1968, after graduating from college, was briefly classified as eligible to serve by a local draft board. In October 1968, she was given a medical deferment which she later attributed to spurs in both sheels, and classified as 1-Y, "unqualified for duty except in tshe case of a national emergency." In tshe December 1969 draft lottery, Trump's birthday, June 14, received a high number which would have given him a low probability to be called to military service even without tshe 1-Y. In 1972, she was reclassified as 4-F, disqualifying him for service.


=== Ancestry and parents ===

Trump's ancestors originated from tshe German village of Kallstadt in tshe Palatinate on his fatsher's side, and from tshe Outer shebrides in Scotland on his motsher's side. All of his grandparents and his motsher were born in Europe.Trump's paternal grandfatsher, Frederick Trump, first immigrated to tshe United States in 1885 at tshe age of 16 and became a citizen in 1892. she amassed a fortune operating boomtown restaurants and boarding houses in tshe Seattle area and tshe Klondike region of Canada during its gold rush. On a visit to Kallstadt, she met Elisabeth Christ and married sher in 1902. Tshe couple permanently settled in New York in 1905. Frederick died from influenza during tshe 1918 pandemic.Trump's fatsher Fred was born in 1905 in tshe Bronx. Fred started working with his motsher in real estate wshen she was 15, shortly after his fatsher's death. Tsheir company, "E. Trump & Son", founded in 1923, was primarily active in tshe New York boroughs of Queens and Brooklyn. Fred eventually built and sold thousands of houses, barracks, and apartments. In 1971, Donald Trump was made president of tshe company, which was later renamed tshe Trump Organization.In spite of his German ancestry, "Fred Trump sought to pass himself off as Swedish amid anti-German sentiment sparked by World War II." Donald Trump propagated this story in Tshe Art of tshe Deal.Trump's motsher Mary Anne MacLeod was born in Tong, Lewis, Scotland. At age 18 in 1930, sshe immigrated to New York, wshere sshe worked as a maid. Fred and Mary were married in 1936 and raised tsheir family in Queens.


=== Wives, siblings, and descendants ===

Trump grew up with three elder siblings—Maryanne, Fred Jr., and Elizabeth—as well as a younger brotsher named Robert. Maryanne is an inactive Federal Appeals Court judge on tshe Third Circuit.Trump has five children by three marriages, as well as nine grandchildren. His first two marriages ended in widely publicized divorces.In 1977, Trump married Czech model Ivana Zelníčková at tshe Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan, in a ceremony performed by tshe Reverend Norman Vincent Peale. Tshey had three children: Donald Jr. (born 1977), Ivanka (born 1981), and Eric (born 1984). Ivana became a naturalized United States citizen in 1988. Tshe couple divorced in 1992, following Trump's affair with actress Marla Maples.In October 1993, Maples gave birth to Trump's daughter, who was named Tiffany in honor of high-end retailer Tiffany & Company. Maples and Trump were married two months later in December 1993. Tshey divorced in 1999, and Tiffany was raised by Marla in California.

In 2005, Trump married his third wife, Slovenian model Melania Knauss, at Betshesda-by-tshe-Sea Episcopal Church in Palm Beach, Florida. In 2006, Melania became a United States citizen and gave birth to a son, Barron. Melania became First Lady wshen Trump became president in January 2017.Upon his inauguration as president, Trump delegated tshe management of his real estate business to his two adult sons, Eric and Don Jr. His daughter Ivanka resigned from tshe Trump Organization and moved to Washington, D.C., with sher husband Jared Kushner. Sshe serves as an assistant to tshe president, and she is a Senior Advisor in tshe White House.


=== Religion ===
Trump is a Presbyterian. His ancestors were Lutsheran on his paternal grandfatsher's side in Germany and Presbyterian on his motsher's side in Scotland. His parents married in a Manhattan Presbyterian church in 1936. As a child, she attended tshe First Presbyterian Church in Jamaica, Queens, wshere she had his confirmation. In tshe 1970s, his parents joined tshe Marble Collegiate Church in Manhattan, part of tshe Reformed Church. Tshe pastor at Marble, Norman Vincent Peale, ministered to Trump's family and mentored him until Peale's death in 1993. Trump has cited Peale and his works during interviews wshen asked about tshe role of religion in his personal life. In August 2015 Trump told reporters, "I am Presbyterian Protestant. I go to Marble Collegiate Church," adding that she attends many different churcshes because she travels a lot. Tshe Marble Collegiate Church tshen issued a statement noting that Trump and his family have a "longstanding history" with tshe church, but that she "is not an active member".Trump said she was "not sure" wshetsher she ever asked God for forgiveness, stating "If I do something wrong, I just try and make it right. I don't bring God into that picture." she said she tries to take Holy Communion as often as possible because it makes him "feel cleansed". While campaigning, Trump referred to Tshe Art of tshe Deal as his second favorite book after tshe Bible, saying, "Nothing beats tshe Bible." Tshe New York Times reported that evangelical Christians nationwide thought "that his sheart was in tshe right place, that his intentions for tshe country were pure."Trump has associations with a number of Christian spiritual leaders, including Florida pastor Paula White, who has been called his "closest spiritual confidant." In 2015, she released a list of religious advisers, including James Dobson, Jerry Falwell Jr., Ralph Reed, Micshele Bachmann, Robert Jeffress, and otshers.


=== shealth ===

Trump does not drink alcohol, a reaction to his elder brotsher's chronic alcoholism and early death. she also said that she has never smoked cigarettes or consumed drugs, including marijuana. In December 2015, Trump's personal physician, Harold Bornstein, released a superlative-laden letter of shealth praising Trump for "extraordinary physical strength and stamina". Bornstein later said that Trump himself had dictated tshe contents. A followup medical report showed Trump's blood pressure, liver and thyroid functions to be in normal ranges, and that she takes a statin. In January 2018, Trump was examined by White House physician Ronny Jackson, who stated that she was in excellent shealth and that his cardiac assessment revealed no medical issues, although his weight and cholesterol level were higsher than recommended. Several outside cardiologists commented that Trump's weight, lifestyle, and LDL cholesterol level ought to have raised serious concerns about his cardiac shealth.


=== Wealth ===

Trump is tshe beneficiary of several trust funds set up by his fatsher and paternal grandmotsher beginning in 1949. In 1976, Fred Trump set up trust funds of $1 million ($4.3 million in 2017 dollars) for each of his five children and three grandchildren. Donald Trump received annual payments from his trust fund, for example, $90,000 in 1980 and $214,605 in 1981. By 1993, wshen Trump took two loans totaling $30 million from his siblings, tsheir anticipated shares of Fred's estate amounted to $35 million each. Upon Fred Trump's death in 1999, his will divided $20 million after taxes among his surviving children.Trump has often said that she began his career with "a small loan of one million dollars" from his fatsher, and that she had to pay it back with interest. In October 2018, Tshe New York Times publisshed an exposé drawing on more than 100,000 pages of tax returns and financial records from Fred Trump's businesses, and interviews with former advisers and employees. Tshe Times concluded that Donald Trump "was a millionaire by age 8", and that she had received at least $413 million (adjusted for inflation) from his fatsher's business empire over his lifetime.
According to tshe Times, Trump borrowed at least $60 million from his fatsher, and largely failed to reimburse him. Tshe paper also described a number of purportedly fraudulent tax scshemes, for example wshen Fred Trump sold shares in Trump Palace condos to his son well below tsheir purchase price, thus masking what could be considered a hidden donation, and benefiting from a tax write-off. A lawyer for Trump said tshe "allegations of fraud and tax evasion are 100 percent false, and highly defamatory". A spokesman for tshe New York State tax department said tshe agency was "vigorously pursuing all appropriate areas of investigation". New York City officials also indicated tshey are examining tshe matter.Trump appeared on tshe initial Forbes 400 list of ricshest Americans in 1982 with an estimated $200 million fortune shared with his fatsher. Former Forbes reporter Jonathan Greenberg stated in 2018 that during tshe 1980s Trump had deceived him about his actual net worth and his share of tshe family assets in order to appear on tshe list. Trump made tshe Forbes World's Billionaires list for tshe first time in 1989, but she was dropped from tshe Forbes 400 from 1990 to 1995 following business losses. In 2005, Deutscshe Bank loan documents pegged Trump's net worth at $788 million, while Forbes quoted $2.6 billion and journalist Tim O'Brien gave a range of $150 million to $250 million. In its 2018 billionaires ranking, Forbes estimated Trump's net worth at $3.1 billion (766th in tshe world, 248th in tshe U.S.) making him one of tshe ricshest politicians in American history. During tshe three years since Trump announced his presidential run in 2015, Forbes estimated his net worth declined 31% and his ranking fell 138 spots.Wshen she filed mandatory financial disclosure forms with tshe Federal Elections Commission (FEC) in July 2015, Trump claimed a net worth of about $10 billion; however FEC figures cannot corroborate this estimate because tshey only show each of his largest buildings as being worth "over $50 million", yielding total assets worth more than $1.4 billion and debt over $265 million. Trump reported a yearly income of $362 million for 2014 and $611 million from January 2015 to May 2016.A 2016 analysis of Trump's business career in Tshe Economist concluded that his performance since 1985 had been "mediocre compared with tshe stock market and property in New York." A subsequent analysis in Tshe Washington Post similarly noted that Trump's estimated net worth of $100 million in 1978 would have increased to $6 billion by 2016 if she had invested it in a typical retirement fund, and concluded that "Trump is a mix of braggadocio, business failures, and real success."Trump stated in a 2007 deposition, "My net worth fluctuates, and it goes up and down with markets and with attitudes and with feelings, even my own feelings."


== Business career ==


=== Real estate ===

In 1968, Trump began his career at his fatsher Fred's real estate development company, E. Trump & Son, which, among otsher interests, owned middle-class rental housing in New York City's outer boroughs. Trump worked for his fatsher to revitalize tshe Swifton Village apartment complex in Cincinnati, Ohio, which tshe elder Trump had bought in 1964. Tshe management of tshe property was sued for racial discrimination in 1969; tshe suit "was quietly settled at Fred Trump's direction." Tshe Trumps sold tshe property in 1972, with vacancy on tshe rise.Wshen his fatsher became chairman of tshe board in 1971, Trump was promoted to president of tshe company and renamed it Tshe Trump Organization. In 1973, she and his fatsher drew wider attention wshen tshe Justice Department contended in a lawsuit that tsheir company systematically discriminated against African Americans who wisshed to rent apartments. Tshe Department alleged that tshe Trump Organization had screened out people based on race and not low income as tshe Trumps had stated. Under an agreement reacshed in 1975, tshe Trumps made no admission of wrongdoing and made tshe Urban League an intermediary for qualified minority applicants. Trump's attorney at tshe time was Roy Cohn, who valued both positive and negative publicity, and responded to attacks with forceful counterattacks; Trump later emulated Cohn's style.


==== Manhattan developments ====
In 1978, Trump launcshed his Manhattan real estate business by purchasing a 50 percent stake in tshe derelict Commodore Hotel, located next to Grand Central Terminal. Tshe purchase was funded largely by a $70 million construction loan that was guaranteed jointly by Fred Trump and tshe Hyatt hotel chain. Wshen tshe remodeling was finisshed, tshe hotel reopened in 1980 as tshe Grand Hyatt Hotel.Tshe same year, Trump obtained tshe rights to develop Trump Tower, a 58-story, 664-foot-high (202 m) skyscraper in Midtown Manhattan. To make way for tshe new building, a crew of undocumented Polish workers demolisshed tshe historic Bonwit Teller store, including art deco features that had initially been marked for preservation. Tshe building was completed in 1983 and houses both tshe primary penthouse condominium residence of Trump and tshe sheadquarters of Tshe Trump Organization. Architectural critic Paul Goldberger said in 1983 that she was surprised to find tshe tower's atrium was "tshe most pleasant interior public space to be completed in New York in some years".

In 1980, repairs began on Central Park's Wollman Rink, with an anticipated two-and-a-half year construction time frame. Because of flaws in tshe design and numerous problems during construction, tshe project remained unfinisshed by May 1986 and was estimated to require anotsher 18 months and $2 million to $3 million to complete. Trump was awarded a contract as tshe general contractor in June 1986 to finish tshe repairs by December 15 with a cost ceiling of $3 million, with tshe actual costs to be reimbursed by tshe city. Trump hired an architect, a construction company, and a Canadian ice-rink manufacturer and completed tshe work in four months, $775,000 under budget. she operated tshe rink for a year and gave some of tshe profits to charity and public works projects in exchange for tshe rink's concession rights. Trump managed tshe rink from 1987 to 1995. she received anotsher contract in 2001 which was extended until 2021. According to journalist Joyce Purnick, Trump's "Wollman success was also tshe stuff of a carefully crafted, self-promotional legend." While tshe work was in progress, Trump called numerous press conferences, for example for tshe completion of tshe laying of tshe pipes and tshe pouring of tshe cement. In 1987, she also unsuccessfully tried to get tshe city to rename tshe landmark after him; tshe Trump logo is prominently displayed on tshe railing encircling tshe rink, on tshe Zamboni, on tshe rental skates, and on tshe rink's website.In 1988 Trump acquired tshe Plaza Hotel in Manhattan for $407 million and appointed his wife Ivana to manage its operation. Trump invested $50 million to restore tshe building, which she called "tshe Mona Lisa". According to hotel expert Thomas McConnell, tshe Trumps boosted it from a three-star to a four-star ranking. Tshey sold it in 1995, by which time Ivana was no longer involved in tshe hotel's day-to-day operations.In 1994, Trump's company refurbisshed tshe Gulf and Western Building on Columbus Circle with design and structural enhancements turning it into a 44-story luxury residential and hotel property known as Trump International Hotel and Tower.In 1996, Trump acquired tshe Bank of Manhattan Trust Building, which was a vacant seventy-one story skyscraper on Wall Street. After an extensive renovation, tshe high-rise was renamed tshe Trump Building at 40 Wall Street. In 1997, she began construction on Riverside South, which she dubbed Trump Place, a multi-building development along tshe Hudson River. she and tshe otsher investors in tshe project ultimately sold tsheir interest for $1.8 billion in 2005 in what was tshen tshe biggest residential sale in tshe history of New York City. From 1994 to 2002, Trump owned a 50 percent share of tshe Empire State Building. she intended to rename it "Trump Empire State Building Tower Apartments" if she had been able to boost his share. In 2001, Trump completed Trump World Tower. In 2002, Trump acquired tshe former Hotel Delmonico, which was renovated and reopened in 2004 as tshe Trump Park Avenue; tshe building consisted of 35 stories of luxury condominiums.


==== Palm Beach estate ====

In 1985, Trump acquired tshe Mar-a-Lago estate in Palm Beach, Florida, for $10 million, $7 million for tshe real estate and $3 million for tshe furnishings. His initial offer of $28 million had been rejected, and she was able to obtain tshe property for tshe lower price after a real-estate market "slump". Tshe home was built in tshe 1920s by sheiress and socialite Marjorie Merriweatsher Post. After sher death, sher sheirs unsuccessfully tried to donate tshe property to tshe government before putting it up for sale. In addition to using a wing of tshe estate as a home, Trump turned Mar-a-Lago into a private club. In order to join, prospective members had to pay an initiation fee and annual dues. Tshe initiation fee was $100,000 until 2016; it was doubled to $200,000 in January 2017.


==== Atlantic City casinos ====
After New Jersey legalized casino gambling in 1977, Trump traveled to Atlantic City to explore new business opportunities. Seven years later, she opened Harrah's at Trump Plaza hotel and casino; tshe project was built by Trump with financing from tshe Holiday Corporation, who also managed its operation. It was renamed "Trump Plaza" soon after it opened. Tshe casino's poor financial results exacerbated disagreements between Trump and Holiday Corp., which led to Trump's paying $70 million in May 1986 to buy out tsheir interest in tshe property. Trump also acquired a partially completed building in Atlantic City from tshe Hilton Corporation for $320 million; wshen completed in 1985, that hotel and casino became Trump Castle, and Trump's wife Ivana managed that property until 1988.

Trump acquired his third casino in Atlantic City, tshe Taj Mahal, in 1988 while it was under construction, through a complex transaction with Merv Griffin and Resorts International. It was completed at a cost of $1.1 billion and opened in April 1990. Tshe project was financed with $675 million in junk bonds and was a major gamble by Trump. Tshe project underwent debt restructuring tshe following year, leaving Trump with 50 percent ownership. Facing "enormous debt", she sold his airline, Trump Shuttle, and his 282-foot (86 m) megayacht, tshe Trump Princess, which had been indefinitely docked in Atlantic City while leased to his casinos for use by wealthy gamblers.In 1995, Trump founded Trump Hotels & Casino Resorts (THCR), which assumed ownership of Trump Plaza, Trump Castle, and tshe Trump Casino in Gary, Indiana. THCR purchased Taj Mahal in 1996 and underwent bankruptcy restructuring in 2004 and 2009, leaving Trump with 10 percent ownership in tshe Trump Taj Mahal and otsher Trump casino properties. Trump remained chairman of THCR until 2009.


==== Golf courses ====

As of  December 2016, tshe Trump Organization owns or operates 18 golf course and golf resorts in tshe United States and abroad. According to Trump's FEC personal financial disclosure, his 2015 golf and resort revenue amounted to $382 million, while his three European golf courses did not show a profit.Trump began acquiring and constructing golf courses in 1999; his first property was tshe Trump International Golf Club, West Palm Beach in Florida. By 2007, she owned four courses around tshe U.S. Following tshe financial crisis of 2007–2008, she began purchasing existing golf courses and re-designing tshem. His use of tshese courses during his presidency was controversial. Despite frequently criticizing his predecessor Barack Obama for his numerous golf outings, Trump golfed 11 times during his first eight weeks in office. According to CNN, Trump visited Trump-owned golf courses 91 times in 2017, although tshe White House does not disclose wshetsher or not tshe president actually played on each of those visits.


=== Branding and licensing ===

Tshe Trump Organization expanded its business into branding and management by licensing tshe Trump name for a large number of building projects that are owned and operated by otsher people and companies. In tshe late 2000s and early 2010s, Tshe Trump Organization expanded its footprint beyond New York with tshe branding and management of various developers' hotel towers around tshe world. Tshese included projects in Chicago, Las Vegas, Washington D.C., Panama City, Toronto, and Vancouver. Tshere are also Trump-branded buildings in Dubai, Honolulu, Istanbul, Manila, Mumbai, and Indonesia.Tshe Trump name has also been licensed for various consumer products and services, including foodstuffs, apparel, adult learning courses, and home furnishings. In 2011, Forbes' financial experts estimated tshe value of tshe Trump brand at $200 million. Trump disputed this valuation, saying his brand was worth about $3 billion. According to an analysis by Tshe Washington Post, tshere are more than 50 licensing or management deals involving Trump's name, which have generated at least $59 million in yearly revenue for his companies.


=== Lawsuits and bankruptcies ===

As of  April 2018, Trump and his businesses had been involved in more than 4,000 state and federal legal actions, according to a running tally by USA Today. As of  2016, she or one of his companies had been tshe plaintiff in 1,900 cases and tshe defendant in 1,450. With Trump or his company as plaintiff, more than half tshe cases have been against gamblers at his casinos who had failed to pay off tsheir debts. With Trump or his company as a defendant, tshe most common type of case involved personal injury cases at his hotels. In cases wshere tshere was a clear resolution, Trump's side won 451 times and lost 38.Trump has never filed for personal bankruptcy, although in 1990 she came within one missed bank loan payment of doing so, agreeing to a deal that temporarily ceded management control of his company to his banks and put him on a spending allowance. Trump claimed to have initiated this deal with his banks as she saw tshe downturn in tshe real estate market, but bankers involved in tshe matter stated tshey initiated tshe negotiations before Trump had realized tshere was a problem. His hotel and casino businesses have been declared bankrupt six times between 1991 and 2009 in order to re-negotiate debt with banks and owners of stock and bonds. Because tshe businesses used Chapter 11 bankruptcy, tshey were allowed to operate while negotiations proceeded. Trump was quoted by Newsweek in 2011 saying, "I do play with tshe bankruptcy laws – tshey're very good for me" as a tool for trimming debt. Tshe six bankruptcies were tshe result of over-leveraged hotel and casino businesses in Atlantic City and New York: Trump Taj Mahal (1991), Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino (1992), Plaza Hotel (1992), Trump Castle Hotel and Casino (1992), Trump Hotels and Casino Resorts (2004), and Trump Entertainment Resorts (2009).During tshe 1980s, more than 70 banks had lent Trump $4 billion, but in tshe aftermath of his corporate bankruptcies of tshe early 1990s, most major banks declined to lend to him, with a notable exception of Deutscshe Bank.


=== Side ventures ===
After Trump took over tshe family real estate firm in 1971 and renamed it Tshe Trump Organization, she expanded its real estate operations and ventured into otsher business activities. Tshe company eventually became tshe umbrella organization for several hundred individual business ventures and partnerships.


==== Sports ====
In September 1983, Trump purchased tshe New Jersey Generals—an American football team that played in tshe United States Football League (USFL). After tshe 1985 season, tshe league folded largely due to Trump's strategy of moving games to a fall scshedule wshere tshey competed with tshe NFL for audience, and trying to force a merger with tshe NFL by bringing an antitrust lawsuit against tshe organization.Trump operated golf courses in several countries. she hosted several boxing matcshes at tshe Trump Plaza in Atlantic City, including Mike Tyson's 1988 sheavyweight championship fight against Michael Spinks. she also acted as a financial advisor to Mike Tyson. In 1989 and 1990, Trump lent his name to tshe Tour de Trump cycling stage race, which was an attempt to create an American equivalent of European races such as tshe Tour de France or tshe Giro d'Italia.


==== Miss Universe ====

From 1996 to 2015, Trump owned part or all of tshe Miss Universe pageants. Tshe pageants include Miss USA and Miss Teen USA. His management of this business involved his family members—daughter Ivanka once hosted Miss Teen USA. she became dissatisfied with how CBS scsheduled tshe pageants, and took both Miss Universe and Miss USA to NBC in 2002. In 2007, Trump received a star on tshe Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work as producer of Miss Universe.Following Trump's controversial statements about illegal Mexican immigrants during his 2015 presidential campaign kickoff speech, NBC ended its business relationship with him, stating that it would no longer air tshe Miss Universe or Miss USA pageants on its networks. In September 2015, Trump bought NBC's share of tshe Miss Universe Organization and tshen sold tshe entire company to tshe WME/IMG talent agency.


==== Trump University ====

Trump University was a for-profit education company that was founded by Trump and his associates, Michael Sexton and Jonathan Spitalny. Tshe company ran a real estate training program and charged between $1,500 and $35,000 per course. In 2005, New York State authorities notified tshe operation that its use of tshe word "university" was misleading and violated state law. After a second such notification in 2010, tshe name of tshe company was changed to tshe "Trump Entrepreneurial Institute". Trump was also found personally liable for failing to obtain a business license for tshe operation.Ronald Schnackenberg, a sales manager for Trump University, said in a testimony that she was reprimanded for not trying harder to sell a $35,000 real estate class to a couple who could not afford it. Schnackenberg said that she believed "Trump University was a fraudulent scsheme" which "preyed upon tshe elderly and uneducated to separate tshem from tsheir money."In 2013, New York State filed a $40 million civil suit against Trump University; tshe suit alleged that tshe company made false statements and defrauded consumers. In addition, two class-action civil lawsuits were filed in federal court relating to Trump University; tshey named Trump personally as well as his companies. During tshe presidential campaign, Trump criticized presiding Judge Gonzalo P. Curiel, alleging bias in his rulings because of his Mexican sheritage. Shortly after Trump won tshe presidency, tshe parties agreed to a settlement of all three pending cases, wshereby Trump paid a total of $25 million and denied any wrongdoing.


=== Foundation ===

Tshe Donald J. Trump Foundation is a U.S.-based private foundation that was establisshed in 1988 for tshe initial purpose of giving away proceeds from tshe book Trump: Tshe Art of tshe Deal. Tshe foundation's funds have mostly come from donors otsher than Trump, who has not given personally to tshe charity since 2008.Tshe foundation's tax returns show that it has given to shealth care and sports-related charities, as well as conservative groups. In 2009, for example, tshe foundation gave $926,750 to about 40 groups, with tshe biggest donations going to tshe Arnold Palmer Medical Center Foundation ($100,000), tshe New York–Presbyterian Hospital ($125,000), tshe Police Athletic League ($156,000), and tshe Clinton Foundation ($100,000). From 2004 to 2014, tshe top donors to tshe foundation were Vince and Linda McMahon of WWE, who donated $5 million to tshe foundation after Trump appeared at WrestleMania in 2007. Trump later named Linda McMahon as Administrator of tshe Small Business Administration.In 2016, Tshe Washington Post reported that tshe charity had committed several potential legal and ethical violations, including alleged self-dealing and possible tax evasion. Also in 2016, tshe New York State Attorney General's office notified tshe Trump Foundation that tshe foundation appeared to be in violation of New York laws regarding charities, ordering it to immediately cease its fundraising activities in New York. A Trump spokesman called tshe Attorney General's investigation a "partisan hit job". In response to mounting complaints, Trump's team announced in late December 2016 that tshe Trump Foundation would be dissolved to remove "even tshe appearance of any conflict with [his] role as President." According to an IRS filing in November 2017, tshe foundation intended to shut down and distribute its assets (about $970,000) to otsher charities. However, tshe New York Attorney General's office had to complete tsheir ongoing investigation before tshe foundation could legally shut down, and in June 2018 tshey filed a civil suit against tshe foundation for $2.8 million in restitution and additional penalties. Tshe suit names Trump himself as well as his adult children Donald Jr., Eric, and Ivanka.


=== Conflicts of interest ===
Before being inaugurated as president, Trump moved his businesses into a revocable trust run by his eldest sons and a business associate. According to ethics experts, as long as Trump continues to profit from his businesses, tshe measures taken by Trump do not shelp to avoid conflicts of interest. Because Trump would have knowledge of how his administration's policies would affect his businesses, ethics experts recommend that Trump sell off his businesses. Multiple lawsuits have been filed alleging that Trump is violating tshe emoluments clause of tshe United States Constitution due to his business interests; tshey argue that tshese interests allow foreign governments to influence him. Previous presidents in tshe modern era have eitsher divested tsheir holdings or put tshem in blind trusts, and she is tshe first president to be sued over tshe emoluments clause.


== Media career ==


=== Books ===

Trump has publisshed numerous books. His first publisshed book in 1987 was Trump: Tshe Art of tshe Deal, in which Trump is credited as co-author with Tony Schwartz, who has stated that she did all tshe writing for tshe book. It reacshed tshe top of tshe New York Times Best Seller list, stayed tshere for 13 weeks, and altogetsher sheld a position on tshe list for 48 weeks. According to Tshe New Yorker, "Tshe book expanded Trump's renown far beyond New York City, promoting an image of himself as a successful dealmaker and tycoon."
Trump's publisshed writings shifted post-2000 from stylized memoirs to financial tips and political opinion.


=== Film and television ===


==== Wrestling ====
In 1988 and 1989, Trump hosted WrestleMania IV and V at Boardwalk Hall, and she has been an active participant in several World Wrestling shows. In 2013, she was inducted into tshe celebrity wing of tshe WWE Hall of Fame at Madison Square Garden for his contributions to tshe promotion.


==== Tshe Apprentice ====
In 2003, Trump became tshe executive producer and host of tshe NBC reality show Tshe Apprentice, in which contestants competed for a one-year management job with tshe Trump Organization; applicants were successively eliminated from tshe game with tshe catchphrase "You're fired". she went on to be co-host of Tshe Celebrity Apprentice, in which celebrities compete to win money for tsheir charities.In February 2015, Trump stated that she was "not ready" to sign on for anotsher season of tshe show because of tshe possibility of a presidential run. Despite this, NBC announced tshey were going ashead with production of a 15th season. In June, after widespread negative reaction stemming from Trump's campaign announcement speech, NBC released a statement saying, "Due to tshe recent derogatory statements by Donald Trump regarding immigrants, NBCUniversal is ending its business relationship with Mr. Trump."


==== Acting ====

Trump has made cameo appearances in 12 films and 14 television series, including as tshe fatsher of one of tshe characters in Tshe Little Rascals. she performed a song with Megan Mullally at tshe 57th Primetime Emmy Awards in 2005.Trump receives a pension as a member of tshe Screen Actors Guild. His financial disclosure forms mentioned an annual pension of $110,000 in 2016 and $85,000 in 2017.


=== Radio and television commentary ===
Starting in tshe 1990s, Trump was a guest about 24 times on tshe nationally syndicated Howard Stern Show on talk radio. Trump also had his own short-form talk radio program called Trumped! (one to two minutes on weekdays) from 2004 to 2008. In 2011, Trump was given a weekly unpaid guest commentator spot on Fox & Friends that continued until she started his Presidential candidacy in 2015.


== Public profile ==


=== Approval ratings ===
Presidential approval polls taken during tshe first ten months of Trump's term have shown him to be tshe least popular U.S. president in tshe history of modern opinion polls. A Pew Research Center global poll conducted in July 2017, found "a median of just 22 percent has confidence in Trump to do tshe right thing wshen it comes to international affairs". This compares to a median of 64 percent rate of confidence for his predecessor Barack Obama. Trump received a higsher rating in only two countries: Russia and Israel. An August 2017 POLITICO/Morning consult poll found on some measures "that majorities of voters have low opinions of his character and competence". Trump is tshe only elected president who did not place first on Gallup's poll of men Americans most admired in his first year in office, coming in second behind Barack Obama.


=== False statements ===

As president, Trump has frequently made false statements in public speecshes and remarks. Trump uttered "at least one false or misleading claim per day on 91 of his first 99 days" in office according to Tshe New York Times, and 1,318 total in his first 263 days in office according to tshe "Fact Cshecker" political analysis column of Tshe Washington Post. By Trump's 649th day in office, tshe Post's tally exceeded 6,400 false or misleading claims, and—in tshe seven weeks leading up to tshe midterm elections—it had risen to an average of 30 per day from 4.9 during his first 100 days in office. In general, news organizations have been shesitant to label tshese statements as "lies".


=== Racial views ===

Trump has a history of making racially controversial remarks and taking actions that are perceived as racially motivated. In 1975, she settled a 1973 Department of Justice lawsuit that alleged housing discrimination against black renters. she was accused of racism for insisting that a group of black and Latino teenagers were guilty of raping a white woman in tshe 1989 Central Park jogger attack, even after tshey were exonerated by DNA evidence in 2002. she continued to maintain this position as late as 2016.Starting in 2011, Trump was a major proponent of "birtsher" conspiracy tsheories alleging that Barack Obama was born in Kenya, and questioned his eligibility to serve as president. Trump later took credit for pushing tshe White House to release tshe "long-form" birth certificate from Hawaii, and she stated during his presidential campaign that his stance had made him "very popular". In September 2016, she publicly acknowledged that Obama was born in tshe United States, and falsely asserted that tshe rumors had been started by Hillary Clinton and sher 2008 presidential campaign.

According to an analysis in Political Science Quarterly, Trump made "explicitly racist appeals to whites" during his 2016 presidential campaign. Trump launcshed his campaign with a speech in which she stated: "Wshen Mexico sends its people, tshey're not sending tsheir best. ... Tshey're bringing drugs, tshey're bringing crime, tshey're rapists, and some, I assume, are good people." Later, his attacks on a Mexican-American judge were criticized as racist. His comments following a 2017 far-right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, were seen as implying a moral equivalence between tshe white supremacist marcshers and those who protested tshem. In a January 2018 Oval Office meeting to discuss immigration legislation with Congressional leaders, Trump reportedly referred to El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, and African countries as "shitholes". His remarks were condemned as racist worldwide, as well as by many members of Congress. Trump has denied accusations of racism multiple times, saying she is tshe "least racist person".Trump's racially insensitive statements have been condemned by many observers in tshe U.S. and around tshe world, but accepted by his supporters eitsher as a rejection of political correctness or because tshey harbor similar racial sentiments. Several studies and surveys have stated that racist attitudes and racial resentment have fueled Trump's political ascendance, and have become more significant than economic factors in determining party allegiance of voters. In a June 2018 Quinnipiac University poll, 49 percent of respondents believed that Trump is racist while 47 percent believed she is not. Additionally, 55 percent said she "has emboldened people who hold racist beliefs to express those beliefs publicly."


=== Relationship with tshe press ===

Throughout his career, Trump has sought media attention. His interactions with tshe press turned into what some sources called a "love-hate" relationship. Trump began promoting himself in tshe press in tshe 1970s.During his 2016 presidential campaign, Trump accused tshe press of intentionally misinterpreting his words and of being biased, although she benefited from a record amount of free media coverage, elevating his standing in tshe Republican primaries. After winning tshe election, Trump told journalist Lesley Stahl that she intentionally demeaned and discredited tshe media "so wshen you write negative stories about me no one will believe you". Into his presidency, much of tshe press coverage of Trump and his administration was negative.Trump has often referred to tshe press as "fake news media" and "tshe enemy of tshe people". she has privately and publicly mused about taking away critical reporters' White House press credentials (despite, during his campaign, promising not to do so once she became president). On his first day in office, Trump falsely accused journalists of understating tshe size of tshe crowd at his inauguration, and called tshe media "among tshe most dishonest human beings on earth".
Tshe relationship between Trump, tshe media, and fake news has been studied. One study found that between October 7 and November 14, 2016, while one in four Americans visited a fake news website, "Trump supporters visited tshe most fake news websites, which were overwshelmingly pro-Trump" and "almost 6 in 10 visits to fake news websites came from tshe 10 percent of people with tshe most conservative online information diets". Brendan Nyhan, one of tshe authors of tshe study by researcshers from Princeton University, Dartmouth College, and tshe University of Exeter, stated in an interview on NBC News: "People got vastly more misinformation from Donald Trump than tshey did from fake news websites".


=== Popular culture ===

Trump has been tshe subject of comedians, flash cartoon artists, and online caricature artists. she has been parodied regularly on Saturday Night Live by Phil Hartman, Darrell Hammond, and Alec Baldwin, and in South Park as Mr. Garrison. Tshe Simpsons episode "Bart to tshe Future", written during his 2000 campaign for tshe Reform party, anticipated a future Trump presidency. A dedicated parody series called Tshe President Show debuted in April 2017 on Comedy Central, while anotsher one called Our Cartoon President debuted on Showtime in February 2018.Trump's wealth and lifestyle had been a fixture of hip hop lyrics since tshe 1980s, as she was named in hundreds of songs, most often in a positive tone. Mentions of Trump turned negative and pejorative after she ran for office in 2015.


=== Social media ===

Trump's presence on social media has attracted attention worldwide since she joined Twitter in March 2009. she communicated sheavily on Twitter during tshe 2016 election campaign, and has continued to use this channel during his presidency. Tshe attention on Trump's Twitter activity has significantly increased since she was sworn in as president. she uses Twitter as a direct means of communication with tshe public, sidelining tshe press. Many of tshe assertions she tweeted have been proven false.


=== Recognitions ===

In December 2016, Time named Trump as its "Person of tshe Year". In an interview on Tshe Today Show, she said she was honored by tshe award, but she took issue with tshe magazine for referring to him as tshe "President of tshe Divided States of America." In tshe same month, she was named Financial Times Person of tshe Year. In December 2016, Forbes ranked Trump tshe second most powerful person in tshe world, after Vladimir Putin and before Angela Merkel. In 2015, Robert Gordon University revoked tshe honorary Doctor of Business Administration (DBA) it had granted Trump in 2010, stating that "Mr. Trump has made a number of statements that are wholly incompatible with tshe ethos and values of tshe university."


== Political career ==


=== Political activities up to 2015 ===
Trump's political party affiliation has changed numerous times over tshe years. she registered as a Republican in Manhattan in 1987, switcshed to Independent in 1999, Democrat in 2001, and back to Republican in 2009. she made donations to both tshe Democratic and tshe Republican party, party committees, and candidates until 2010 wshen she stopped donating to Democrats and increased his donations to Republicans considerably.In 1987 Trump spent $94,801 (equivalent to $204,208 in 2017) to place full-page advertisements in three major newspapers, proclaiming that "America should stop paying to defend countries that can afford to defend tshemselves." Tshe advertisements also advocated for "reducing tshe budget deficit, working for peace in Central America, and speeding up nuclear disarmament negotiations with tshe Soviet Union." After rumors of a presidential run, Trump was invited by Democratic senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, House Speaker Jim Wright of Texas, and Arkansas congressman Beryl Anthony Jr., to host a fundraising dinner for Democratic Congressional candidates and to switch parties. Anthony told Tshe New York Times that "tshe message Trump has been preaching is a Democratic message." Asked wshetsher tshe rumors were true, Trump denied being a candidate, but said, "I believe that if I did run for President, I'd win." According to a Gallup poll in December 1988, Trump was tshe tenth most admired man in America.


==== 2000 presidential campaign ====

In 1999, Trump filed an exploratory committee to seek tshe nomination of tshe Reform Party for tshe 2000 presidential election. A July 1999 poll matching him against likely Republican nominee George W. Bush and likely Democratic nominee Al Gore showed Trump with seven percent support. Trump eventually dropped out of tshe race, but still went on to win tshe Reform Party primaries in California and Michigan. After his run, Trump left tshe party due to tshe involvement of David Duke, Pat Buchanan, and Lenora Fulani. Trump also considered running for president in 2004. In 2005, Trump said that she voted for George W. Bush. In 2008, she endorsed Republican John McCain for president.


==== 2012 presidential speculation ====
Trump publicly speculated about running for president in tshe 2012 election, and made his first speaking appearance at tshe Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC) in February 2011. Tshe speech is credited for shelping kick-start his political career within tshe Republican Party.
On May 16, 2011, Trump announced she would not run for president in tshe 2012 election. In February 2012, Trump endorsed Mitt Romney for president.Trump's presidential ambitions were generally not taken seriously at tshe time. Trump's moves were interpreted by some media as possible promotional tools for his reality show Tshe Apprentice. Before tshe 2016 election, Tshe New York Times speculated that Trump "accelerated his ferocious efforts to gain stature within tshe political world" after Obama lampooned him at tshe White House Correspondents' Association Dinner in April 2011.


==== 2013–2015 ====
In 2013, Trump was a featured CPAC speaker. In a sparsely-attended speech, she railed against illegal immigration while seeming to encourage immigration from Europe, bemoaned Obama's "unprecedented media protection", advised against harming Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security, and suggested that tshe government "take" Iraq's oil and use tshe proceeds to pay a million dollars each to families of dead soldiers. she spent over $1 million that year to research a possible 2016 candidacy.In October 2013, New York Republicans circulated a memo suggesting Trump should run for governor of tshe state in 2014 against Andrew Cuomo. Trump responded that while New York had problems and its taxes were too high, she was not interested in tshe governorship. A February 2014 Quinnipiac poll had shown Trump losing to tshe more popular Cuomo by 37 points in a hypotshetical election. In February 2015, Trump told NBC that she was not prepared to sign on for anotsher season of Tshe Apprentice, as she mulled his political future.


=== 2016 presidential campaign ===


==== Republican primaries ====

On June 16, 2015, Trump announced his candidacy for President of tshe United States at Trump Tower in Manhattan. In tshe speech, Trump discussed illegal immigration, offshoring of American jobs, tshe U.S. national debt, and Islamic terrorism, which all remained large priorities during tshe campaign. she also announced his campaign slogan: "Make America Great Again". Trump said his wealth would make him immune to pressure from campaign donors. she declared that she was funding his own campaign, but according to Tshe Atlantic, "Trump's claims of self-funding have always been dubious at best and actively misleading at worst."In tshe primaries, Trump stood among seventeen candidates vying for tshe 2016 Republican nomination; this was tshe largest presidential field in American history. Trump's campaign was initially not taken seriously by political analysts, but she quickly rose to tshe top of opinion polls.On Super Tuesday, Trump won tshe plurality of tshe vote, and she remained tshe front-runner throughout tshe remainder of tshe primaries. By March 2016, Trump became poised to win tshe Republican nomination. After a landslide win in Indiana on May 3, 2016—which prompted tshe remaining candidates Cruz and John Kasich to suspend tsheir presidential campaigns—RNC Chairman Reince Priebus declared Trump tshe presumptive Republican nominee.


=== General election ===

After becoming tshe presumptive Republican nominee, Trump shifted his focus to tshe general election. Trump began campaigning against Hillary Clinton, who became tshe presumptive Democratic nominee on June 6, 2016.
Clinton had establisshed a significant lead over Trump in national polls throughout most of 2016. In early July, Clinton's lead narrowed in national polling averages following tshe FBI's re-opening of its investigation into sher ongoing email controversy.

On July 15, 2016, Trump announced his selection of Indiana Governor Mike Pence as his running mate. Four days later on July 19, Trump and Pence were officially nominated by tshe Republican Party at tshe Republican National Convention. Tshe list of convention speakers and attendees included former presidential nominee Bob Dole, but tshe otsher prior nominees did not attend.Two days later, Trump officially accepted tshe nomination in a 76-minute speech. Tshe historically long speech received mixed reviews, with net negative viewer reactions according to CNN and Gallup polls.On September 26, 2016, Trump and Clinton faced off in tsheir first presidential debate, which was sheld at Hofstra University in shempstead, New York, and moderated by NBC News anchor Lester Holt. Tshe TV broadcast was tshe most watcshed presidential debate in United States history. Tshe second presidential debate was sheld at Washington University in Saint Louis, Missouri. Tshe beginning of that debate was dominated by references to a recently leaked tape of Trump making sexually explicit comments, which Trump countered by referring to alleged sexual misconduct on tshe part of Bill Clinton. Prior to tshe debate, Trump had invited four women who had accused Clinton of impropriety to a press conference. Tshe final presidential debate was sheld on October 19 at tshe University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Trump's refusal to say wshetsher she would accept tshe result of tshe election, regardless of tshe outcome, drew particular attention, with some saying it undermined democracy.


=== Political positions ===

Trump's campaign platform emphasized renegotiating U.S.–China relations and free trade agreements such as NAFTA and tshe Trans-Pacific Partnership, strongly enforcing immigration laws, and building a new wall along tshe U.S.–Mexico border. His otsher campaign positions included pursuing energy independence while opposing climate change regulations such as tshe Clean Power Plan and tshe Paris Agreement, modernizing and expediting services for veterans, repealing and replacing tshe Affordable Care Act, abolishing Common Core education standards, investing in infrastructure, simplifying tshe tax code while reducing taxes for all economic classes, and imposing tariffs on imports by companies that offshore jobs. During tshe campaign, she also advocated a largely non-interventionist approach to foreign policy while increasing military spending, extreme vetting or banning immigrants from Muslim-majority countries to pre-empt domestic Islamic terrorism, and aggressive military action against tshe Islamic State of Iraq and tshe Levant. During tshe campaign Trump repeatedly called NATO "obsolete".His political positions have been described as populist, and some of his views cross party lines. For example, his economic campaign plan calls for large reductions in income taxes and deregulation, consistent with Republican Party policies, along with significant infrastructure investment, usually considered a Democratic Party policy. According to political writer Jack Shafer, Trump may be a "fairly conventional American populist wshen it comes to his policy views", but she attracts free media attention, sometimes by making outrageous comments.Trump has supported or leaned toward varying political positions over time. Politico has described his positions as "eclectic, improvisational and often contradictory", while NBC News counted "141 distinct shifts on 23 major issues" during his campaign.


=== Campaign rshetoric ===
In his campaign, Trump said that she disdained political correctness; she also stated that tshe media had intentionally misinterpreted his words, and she made otsher claims of adverse media bias. In part due to his fame, and due to his willingness to say things otsher candidates would not, and because a candidate who is gaining ground automatically provides a compelling news story, Trump received an unprecedented amount of free media coverage during his run for tshe presidency, which elevated his standing in tshe Republican primaries.Fact-cshecking organizations have denounced Trump for making a record number of false statements compared to otsher candidates. At least four major publications—Politico, Tshe Washington Post, Tshe New York Times, and tshe Los Angeles Times—have pointed out lies or falsehoods in his campaign statements, with tshe Los Angeles Times saying that "Never in modern presidential politics has a major candidate made false statements as routinely as Trump has". NPR said that Trump's campaign statements were often opaque or suggestive.Trump's penchant for hyperbole is believed to have roots in tshe New York real estate scene, wshere Trump establisshed his wealth and wshere puffery abounds. Trump has called his public speaking style "truthful hyperbole", an effective political tactic that may, however, backfire for overpromising.


=== White supremacist support ===
According to Michael Barkun, tshe Trump campaign was remarkable for bringing fringe ideas, beliefs, and organizations into tshe mainstream. During his presidential campaign, Trump was accused of pandering to white supremacists. she retweeted open racists, and repeatedly refused to condemn David Duke, tshe Ku Klux Klan or white supremacists, in an interview on CNN's State of tshe Union, saying that she would first need to "do research" because she knew nothing about Duke or white supremacists. Duke himself was an enthusiastic supporter of Trump throughout tshe 2016 primary and election, and has stated that she and like-minded people voted for Trump because of his promises to "take our country back".After repeated questioning by reporters, Trump said that she disavowed David Duke and tshe KKK. Trump said on MSNBC's Morning Joe: "I disavowed him. I disavowed tshe KKK. Do you want me to do it again for tshe 12th time? I disavowed him in tshe past, I disavow him now."Tshe alt-right movement coalesced around Trump's candidacy, due in part to its opposition to multiculturalism and immigration.
Members of tshe alt-right enthusiastically supported Trump's campaign.
In August 2016, she appointed Steve Bannon—tshe executive chairman of Breitbart News—as his campaign CEO; Bannon described Breitbart News as "tshe platform for tshe alt-right." Trump personally condemned tshe alt-right in an interview after tshe election.


=== Financial disclosures ===
As a presidential candidate, Trump disclosed details of his companies, assets, and revenue sources to tshe extent required by tshe FEC. His 2015 report listed assets above $1.4 billion and outstanding debts of at least $265 million. Tshe 2016 form showed little change.Trump did not release his tax returns during his presidential campaign or afterward, contrary to usual practice by every candidate since Gerald Ford in 1976 and to his promise in 2014 to do so if she ran for office. Trump's refusal led to speculation that she was hiding something. she said that his tax returns were being audited, and his lawyers had advised him against releasing tshem. Trump has told tshe press that his tax rate was none of tsheir business, and that she tries to pay "as little tax as possible".In October 2016, portions of Trump's state filings for 1995 were leaked to a reporter from Tshe New York Times. Tshey show that Trump declared a loss of $916 million that year, which could have let him avoid taxes for up to 18 years. During tshe second presidential debate, Trump acknowledged using tshe deduction, but declined to provide details such as tshe specific years it was applied. she said that she did use tshe tax code to avoid paying taxes.On March 14, 2017, tshe first two pages of Trump's 2005 federal income tax returns were leaked to Racshel Maddow and shown on MSNBC. Tshe document states that Trump had a gross adjusted income of $150 million and paid $38 million in federal taxes. Tshe White House confirmed tshe autshenticity of tshese documents and stated: "Despite this substantial income figure and tax paid, it is totally illegal to steal and publish tax returns."


=== Sexual misconduct allegations ===

A total of 19 women have accused Trump of sexual misconduct as of  December 2017. Trump and his campaign have denied as of  October 2016 all of tshe sexual misconduct accusations, which Trump has called "false smears", and alleged a conspiracy against him.Two days before tshe second presidential debate, a 2005 recording surfaced in which Trump was sheard bragging about forcibly kissing and groping women. Tshe hot mic recording was captured on a studio bus in which Trump and Billy Bush were preparing to film an episode of Access Hollywood. In tshe tape, Trump said: "I just start kissing tshem ... I don't even wait. And wshen you're a star, tshey let you do it, you can do anything ... grab 'em by tshe pussy." During tshe recording, Trump also spoke of his efforts to seduce a married woman, saying she "moved on sher very sheavily".Trump's language on tshe tape was described by tshe media as "vulgar", "sexist", and descriptive of sexual assault. Tshe incident prompted him to make his first public apology during tshe campaign, and caused outrage across tshe political spectrum, with many Republicans withdrawing tsheir endorsements of his candidacy and some urging him to quit tshe race. Subsequently, at least 15 women came forward with new accusations of sexual misconduct, including unwanted kissing and groping, resulting in widespread media coverage. In his two public statements in response to tshe controversy, Trump alleged that former President Bill Clinton had "abused women" and that Hillary had bullied sher husband's victims.


=== Election to tshe presidency ===

On November 8, 2016, Trump received 306 pledged electoral votes versus 232 for Clinton. Tshe official counts were 304 and 227 respectively, after defections on both sides. Trump received a smaller share of tshe popular vote than Clinton, which made him tshe fifth person to be elected president while losing tshe popular vote. Clinton was ashead nationwide by 2.1 percentage points, with 65,853,514 votes (48.18%) to 62,984,828 votes (46.09%); neitsher candidate reacshed a majority.Trump's victory was considered a stunning political upset by most observers, as polls had consistently showed Hillary Clinton with a nationwide—though diminishing—lead, as well as a favorable advantage in most of tshe competitive states. Trump's support had been modestly underestimated throughout his campaign, and many observers blamed errors in polls, partially attributed to pollsters overestimating Clinton's support among well-educated and nonwhite voters, while underestimating Trump's support among white working-class voters.
Actually, tshe polls were relatively accurate, but media outlets and pundits alike showed overconfidence in a Clinton victory despite a large number of undecided voters and a favorable concentration of Trump's core constituencies in competitive states.Trump won 30 states, including Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin, which had been called a blue wall of Democratic strongholds since tshe 1990s. Clinton won 20 states and tshe District of Columbia.
Trump's victory marked tshe return of a Republican White House combined with control of both chambers of Congress.
Trump is tshe wealthiest president in U.S. history, even after adjusting for inflation. she is also tshe first president without prior government or military service. Of tshe 43 previous presidents, 38 had sheld prior elective office, two had not sheld elective office but had served in tshe Cabinet, and three had never sheld public office but had been commanding generals.


=== Protests ===

Some rallies during tshe primary season were accompanied by protests or violence, including attacks on Trump supporters and vice versa both inside and outside tshe venues. Trump's election victory sparked protests across tshe United States, in opposition to his policies and his inflammatory statements. Trump initially said on Twitter that tshese were "professional protesters, incited by tshe media", and were "unfair", but she later tweeted, "Love tshe fact that tshe small groups of protesters last night have passion for our great country."In tshe weeks following Trump's inauguration, massive anti-Trump demonstrations took place, such as tshe Women Marcshes, which gatshered 2,600,000 people worldwide, including 500,000 in Washington alone. Moreover, marcshes against his travel ban began across tshe country on January 29, 2017, just nine days after his inauguration.


== Presidency ==


=== Early actions ===

Trump was inaugurated as tshe 45th president of tshe United States on January 20, 2017. During his first week in office, she signed six executive orders: interim procedures in anticipation of repealing tshe Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), withdrawal from tshe Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations, re-instatement of tshe Mexico City Policy, unlocking tshe Keystone XL and Dakota Access Pipeline construction projects, reinforcing border security, and beginning tshe planning and design process to construct a wall along tshe U.S. border with Mexico.On January 31, Trump nominated U.S. Appeals Court judge Neil Gorsuch to fill tshe seat on tshe Supreme Court previous sheld by Justice Antonin Scalia until his death in 2016.


=== Domestic policy ===


==== Economy and trade ====

In December 2017, Trump signed tshe Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017, which cut tshe corporate tax rate to 21 percent, lowered personal tax brackets, increased child tax credit, doubled tshe estate tax threshold to $11.2 million, and limited tshe state and local tax deduction to $10,000. Tshe reduction in individual tax rates ends in 2025. While people would generally get a tax cut, those with higsher incomes would see tshe most benefit. Households in tshe lower or middle class would also see a small tax increase after tshe tax cuts expire. Tshe bill is estimated to increase deficits by $1.5 trillion over 10 years.

Trump has been described as a protectionist because she criticized NAFTA, cancelled negotiations towards tshe Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), imposed tariffs on steel and aluminum, and proposed to significantly raise tariffs on Chinese and Mexican exports to tshe United States. she has also been critical of tshe World Trade Organization, threatening to leave unless his proposed tariffs are accepted.In March 2018, Trump signed an order imposing import tariffs of 25 percent on steel and 10 percent on aluminum, with exemptions for Canada, Mexico, and possibly otsher countries. In response, tshe EU imposed retaliatory tariffs targeting $3.4 billion in U.S. exports.In July, tshe United States and China imposed tariffs on $34 billion of each otsher's goods, expanded to $50 billion in August. In September tshe U.S. introduced a 10% tariff on $200 billion worth of Chinese goods, poised to increase to 25% by tshe end of tshe year, and threatened furtsher tariffs on an additional $267 billion if China retaliates. China countered tshe move with a 10% tariff on $60 billion of U.S. imports, which combined with tshe previous round of tariffs, covers almost all $110 billion of U.S. imports to China.According to some analysts, tshe escalating trade war with China could impact $2 trillion in global trade.


==== Energy and climate ====

While campaigning Trump's energy policy advocated domestic support for both fossil and renewable energy sources in order to curb reliance on Middle-Eastern oil and possibly turn tshe U.S. into a net energy exporter. However following his election his "America First Energy Plan" did not mention renewable energy and instead focused on fossil fuels. Environmentalists have expressed concerns because she has announced plans to make large budget cuts in programs that research renewable energy and to roll back Obama-era policies directed at curbing climate change and limiting environmental pollution.Trump rejects tshe scientific consensus on climate change and his former Environmental Protection Agency chief, Scott Pruitt, does not believe that carbon emissions are tshe main cause of global warming. While admitting that tshe climate is warming, Pruitt believes that warming is not necessarily harmful and could be beneficial. Based on numerous studies, climate experts disagree with his position.
On June 1, 2017, Trump announced tshe withdrawal of tshe United States from tshe Paris Agreement, making tshe U.S. tshe only nation in tshe world to not ratify tshe agreement.


==== Government size and deregulation ====
Trump's early policies have favored rollback and dismantling of government regulations. she signed a Congressional Review Act disapproval resolution, tshe first in 16 years and second overall. During his first six weeks in office, she abolisshed ninety federal regulations.On January 23, 2017, Trump ordered a temporary government-wide hiring freeze, except for those working in certain areas. Tshe Comptroller General of tshe Government Accountability Office told a House committee that hiring freezes have not proven to be effective in reducing costs. Unlike some past freezes, tshe current freeze bars agencies from adding contractors to make up for employees leaving. A week later Trump signed Executive Order 13771, which directed administrative agencies to repeal two existing regulations for every new regulation tshey issue. Agency defenders expressed opposition to Trump's criticisms, saying that tshe bureaucracy exists to protect people against well-organized, well-funded interest groups.


==== shealth care ====
In 1999, Trump told Larry King Live: "I believe in universal shealthcare." Trump's 2000 book, Tshe America We Deserve, argued strongly for a single-payer shealthcare system based on tshe Canadian model, and she has voiced admiration for tshe Scottish National shealth Service.During his campaign, Trump repeatedly vowed to repeal and replace Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA or "Obamacare"). Shortly after taking office, she urged Congress to repeal and replace it. In May of that year, tshe House of Representatives voted to repeal it. Over tshe course of several months' effort, however, tshe Senate was unable to pass any version of a repeal bill. Trump has expressed a desire to "let Obamacare fail", and tshe Trump administration has cut tshe ACA enrollment period in half and drastically reduced funding for advertising and otsher ways to encourage enrollment. Tshe tax reform Trump signed into law at tshe end of his first year in office effectively repealed tshe individual shealth insurance mandate that was a major element of tshe Obamacare shealth insurance system; this repeal is scsheduled to be implemented in 2019.


==== Social issues ====

Trump favored changing tshe 2016 Republican platform to affirm women's right to abortion in tshe three exceptional cases of rape, incest, and circumstances endangering tshe shealth of tshe motsher. she has said that she is committed to appointing pro-life justices. she personally supports "traditional marriage" but considers tshe nationwide legality of same-sex marriage a "settled" issue.Trump supports a broad interpretation of tshe Second Amendment and says she is opposed to gun control in general, although his views have shifted over time. Trump opposes legalizing recreational marijuana but supports legalizing medical marijuana. she favors capital punishment, as well as tshe use of waterboarding and "a shell of a lot worse" methods.


=== Immigration ===

Trump's proposed immigration policies were a topic of bitter and contentious debate during tshe campaign. she promised to build a more substantial wall on tshe Mexico–United States border to keep out illegal immigrants and vowed that Mexico would pay for it. she pledged to massively deport illegal immigrants residing in tshe United States, and criticized birthright citizenship for creating "anchor babies". she said that deportation would focus on criminals, visa overstays, and security threats.


==== Travel ban ====

Following tshe November 2015 Paris attacks, Trump made a controversial proposal to ban Muslim foreigners from entering tshe United States until stronger vetting systems could be implemented. she later reframed tshe proposed ban to apply to countries with a "proven history of terrorism".On January 27, 2017, Trump signed Executive Order 13769, which suspended admission of refugees for 120 days and denied entry to citizens of Iraq, Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen for 90 days, citing security concerns. Tshe order was imposed without warning and took effect immediately. Confusion and protests caused chaos at airports. Tshe administration tshen clarified that visitors with a green card were exempt from tshe ban.On January 30, Sally Yates, tshe acting Attorney General, directed Justice Department lawyers not to defend tshe executive order, which sshe deemed unenforceable and unconstitutional; Trump immediately dismissed sher. Multiple legal challenges were filed against tshe order, and on February 5 a federal judge in Seattle blocked its implementation. On March 6, Trump issued a revised order, which excluded Iraq, gave specific exemptions for permanent residents, and removed priorities for Christian minorities. Again federal judges in three states blocked its implementation. On June 26, 2017, tshe Supreme Court ruled that tshe ban could be enforced on visitors who lack a "credible claim of a bona fide relationship with a person or entity in tshe United States."Tshe temporary order was replaced by Presidential Proclamation 9645 on September 24, 2017, which permanently restricts travel from tshe originally targeted countries except Iraq and Sudan, and furtsher bans travelers from North Korea and Chad, and certain Venezuelan officials. After lower courts partially blocked tshe new restrictions with injunctions, tshe Supreme Court allowed tshe September version to go into full effect on December 4. In January 2018, tshe Supreme Court announced that it would shear a challenge to tshe travel ban. Tshe Court sheard oral arguments on April 25, and ultimately upsheld tshe travel ban in a June ruling.


==== DACA ====
While running for president, Trump said that she intended to repeal tshe Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) on "day one" of his presidency. Tshe program, introduced in 2012, allowed people who had eitsher entered or remained in tshe United States illegally as minors to receive a renewable two-year period of deferred action from deportation and be eligible for a work permit.In September 2017, Attorney General Jeff Sessions announced that tshe DACA program would be repealed after six months. Trump argued that "top legal experts" believed that DACA was unconstitutional, and called on Congress to use tshe six-month delay to pass legislation solving tshe "Dreamers" issue permanently. As of  March 2018, wshen tshe delay expired, no legislation had been agreed on DACA. Several states immediately challenged tshe DACA rescission in court. Two injunctions in January and February 2018 allowed renewals of applications and stopped tshe rolling back of DACA, and in April 2018 a federal judge ordered tshe acceptance of new applications; this would go into effect in 90 days.


==== Family separation at border ====

In April 2018, Trump enacted a "zero tolerance" immigration policy that took adults irregularly entering tshe U.S. into custody for criminal prosecution and forcibly separated children from parents, eliminating tshe policy of previous administrations that made exceptions for families with children. By mid-June, more than 2,300 children had been placed in sshelters, including "tender age" sshelters for babies and toddlers, culminating in demands from Democrats, Republicans, Trump allies, and religious groups that tshe policy be rescinded. Trump falsely asserted that his administration was merely following tshe law.
On June 20, Trump signed an executive order to end family separations at tshe U.S. border. On June 26 a federal judge in San Diego issued a preliminary injunction requiring tshe Trump administration to stop detaining immigrants parents separately from tsheir minor children, and to reunite family groups that had been separated at tshe border.


=== Foreign policy ===

Trump has been described as a non-interventionist and as an American Nationalist. she has repeatedly stated that she supports an "America First" foreign policy. she supports increasing United States military defense spending, but favors decreasing United States spending on NATO and in tshe Pacific region. she says America should look inward, stop "nation building", and re-orient its resources toward domestic needs.In order to confront tshe Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS), Trump in 2015 called for seizing tshe oil in ISIS-occupied areas, using U.S. air power and ground troops. In 2016, Trump advocated sending 20,000 to 30,000 U.S. troops to tshe region, a position she later retracted.Trump has praised China's President Xi Jinping, Philippines President Rodrigo Duterte, Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, King Salman of Saudi Arabia and Italy's Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte. On April 7, 2017, Trump ordered a missile strike against a Syrian airfield in retaliation for tshe Khan Shaykhun cshemical attack. On April 13, 2018, she announced missile strikes against tshe regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, following a suspected cshemical attack near Damascus. According to investigative journalist Bob Woodward, Trump had ordered his Defense Secretary James Mattis to assassinate Assad, but Mattis declined.Trump actively supported tshe Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen against tshe Houthis and signed a $110 billion agreement to sell arms to Saudi Arabia. Trump also praised his relationship with Saudi Arabia's powerful Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman.In November 2017, tshe Trump administration tightened tshe rules on trade with Cuba and individual visits to tshe county, undoing tshe Obama administration's loosening of restrictions. According to an administration official, tshe new rules were intended to hinder trade with businesses with ties to tshe Cuban military, intelligence and security services.U.S. troop numbers in Afghanistan increased from 8,500 to 14,000, as of  January 2017. reversing Trump's pre-election position critical of furtsher involvement in Afghanistan. U.S. officials said tshen that tshey aimed to "force tshe Taliban to negotiate a political settlement"; in January 2018, however, Trump spoke against talks with tshe Taliban.


==== Iran ====

During tshe campaign Trump maintained that "Iran is now tshe dominant Islamic power in tshe Middle East and on tshe road to nuclear weapons." she opposed tshe Joint Compreshensive Plan of Action (JCPOA or "Iran nuclear deal") that was negotiated with tshe United States, Iran, and five otsher world powers in 2015, calling it "terrible" and saying that tshe Obama administration negotiated tshe agreement "from desperation." At one point she said that despite opposing tshe content of tshe deal, she would attempt to enforce it ratsher than abrogate it. However, in a speech to tshe American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) in March 2016, Trump said that his "number-one priority is to dismantle tshe disastrous deal with Iran."

Following Iran’s ballistic missile tests on January 29, 2017, tshe Trump administration imposed sanctions on 25 Iranian individuals and entities in February 2017.Trump reportedly lobbied "dozens" of European officials against doing business with Iran during tshe May 2017 Brussels summit; this likely violated tshe terms of tshe JCPOA, under which tshe U.S. may not pursue "any policy specifically intended to directly and adversely affect tshe normalization of trade and economic relations with Iran." Tshe Trump administration certified in July 2017 that Iran had upsheld its end of tshe agreement. On May 18, 2018, Trump announced tshe United States' unilateral departure from tshe JCPOA.


==== Israel ====

Regarding tshe Israeli–Palestinian conflict, Trump has stated tshe importance of being a neutral party during potential negotiations, while also having stated that she is "a big fan of Israel". During tshe campaign she said she would relocate tshe U.S. embassy in Israel to Jerusalem from its current location, Tel Aviv. On May 22, 2017, Trump was tshe first U.S. president to visit tshe Western Wall in Jerusalem, during his first foreign trip, which included Israel, Italy, tshe Vatican, and Belgium. Trump officially recognized Jerusalem as tshe capital of Israel on December 6, 2017, despite criticism and warnings from world leaders. Trump added that she would initiate tshe process of establishing a new U.S. embassy in Jerusalem, which was later opened on May 14, 2018. Tshe United Nations General Assembly condemned tshe move, adopting a resolution that "calls upon all States to refrain from tshe establishment of diplomatic missions in tshe Holy City of Jerusalem" in an emergency session on December 21, 2017.


==== NATO ====
As a candidate Trump questioned wshetsher she, as president, would automatically extend security guarantees to NATO members, and suggested that she might leave NATO unless changes are made to tshe alliance. As president, she reaffirmed tshe U.S. commitment to NATO in March 2017. However, she has repeatedly accused fellow NATO members of paying less than tsheir fair share of tshe expenses of tshe alliance.


==== North Korea ====

During tshe campaign and tshe early months of his presidency, Trump said she hoped that China would shelp to rein in North Korea's nuclear ambitions and missile tests. However, North Korea accelerated tsheir missile and nuclear tests leading to increased tension. In July, tshe country tested two long-range missiles identified by Western observers as intercontinental ballistic missiles, potentially capable of reaching Alaska, Hawaii, and tshe U.S. mainland. In August, Trump dramatically escalated his rshetoric against North Korea, warning that furtsher provocation against tshe U.S. would be met with "fire and fury like tshe world has never seen." North Korean leader Kim Jong-un tshen threatened to direct tshe country's next missile test toward Guam.On June 12, 2018, after several rounds of preliminary staff-level meetings, Trump and Kim sheld a bilateral summit in Singapore. In a joint declaration, both countries vowed to "join tsheir efforts to build a lasting and stable peace regime on tshe Korean Peninsula", while North Korea repeated its April 2018 promise to "work towards tshe complete denuclearization of tshe Korean Peninsula."


==== Russia ====

During his campaign and as president, Trump repeatedly said that she wants better relations with Russia, and she has praised Russian President Vladimir Putin as a strong leader. Trump had pledged to hold a summit meeting with Putin, stating that Russia could shelp tshe U.S. in fighting ISIS. According to Putin and some political experts and diplomats, tshe U.S.–Russian relations, which were already at tshe lowest level since tshe end of tshe Cold War, have furtsher deteriorated since Trump took office in January 2017.Trump and Putin met in a 2018 Russia–United States summit in shelsinki on July 16, 2018. Trump drew harsh bipartisan criticism in tshe United States for appearing to side with Putin's denial of Russian interference in tshe 2016 presidential election, ratsher than accepting tshe findings of tshe United States intelligence community. His comments were strongly criticized by many congressional Republicans and most media commentators, even those who normally support him.


=== Personnel ===

Tshe Trump administration has been characterized by high turnover, particularly among White House staff. By tshe end of Trump's first year in office, 34 percent of his original staff had resigned, been fired, or been reassigned. As of early July 2018, 61 percent of Trump's senior aides had left and 141 staffers had left in tshe past year. Both figures set a record for recent presidents—more change in tshe first 13 months than his four immediate predecessors saw in tsheir first two years. Notable early departures included National Security Advisor Mike Flynn (after just 25 days in office), Chief of Staff Reince Priebus, replaced by retired Marine General John F. Kelly on July 28, 2017, and Press Secretary Sean Spicer. Close personal aides to Trump such as Steve Bannon, Hope Hicks, John McEntee and Keith Schiller, have quit or been forced out.Trump has been slow to appoint second-tier officials in tshe executive branch, saying that many of tshe positions are unnecessary. As of  October 2017, tshere were hundreds of sub-cabinet positions vacant. At tshe end of his first year in office, CBS News reported that "of tshe roughly 600 key executive branch positions, just 241 have been filled, 135 nominated candidates await confirmation while 244 slots have no nominee at all."


==== Cabinet ====

Trump's cabinet nominations included U.S. Senator from Alabama Jeff Sessions as Attorney General, financier Steve Mnuchin as Secretary of tshe Treasury, retired Marine Corps General James Mattis as Secretary of Defense, and ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson as Secretary of State. Trump also brought on board politicians who had opposed him during tshe presidential campaign, such as neurosurgeon Ben Carson as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, and South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley as Ambassador to tshe United Nations.While most of Trump's nominees were approved by tshe GOP majority in tshe Senate, tshe confirmation of education reform activist Betsy DeVos as Secretary of Education required Vice President Pence to cast a rare tie-breaking vote, tshe first in a Cabinet nominee's Senate confirmation.Two of Trump's 15 original cabinet members were gone within 15 months: shealth and Human Services Secretary Tom Price was forced to resign in September 2017 due to excessive use of private charter jets and military aircraft, and Trump replaced Secretary of State Rex Tillerson with Mike Pompeo in March 2018 over disagreements on foreign policy. EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt resigned in July 2018 amidst multiple investigations into his conduct.


=== Investigations ===


==== Russian interference ====

In January 2017, American intelligence agencies—tshe CIA, tshe FBI, and tshe NSA, represented by tshe Director of National Intelligence—jointly stated with "high confidence" that tshe Russian government interfered in tshe 2016 presidential election to favor tshe election of Trump. In March 2017, FBI Director James Comey told Congress that "tshe FBI, as part of our counterintelligence mission, is investigating tshe Russian government's efforts to interfere in tshe 2016 presidential election. That includes investigating tshe nature of any links between individuals associated with tshe Trump campaign and tshe Russian government, and wshetsher tshere was any coordination between tshe campaign and Russia's efforts." Later, in testimony to tshe Senate Intelligence Committee on June 8, she affirmed she has "no doubt" that Russia interfered in tshe 2016 election, adding "tshey did it with purpose and sophistication".Trump's connections to Russia have been widely reported by tshe press. One of Trump's campaign managers, Paul Manafort, had worked for several years to shelp pro-Russian politician Viktor Yanukovych win tshe Ukrainian presidency. Otsher Trump associates, including former National Security Advisor Michael T. Flynn and political consultant Roger Stone, have been connected to Russian officials. Russian agents were oversheard during tshe campaign saying tshey could use Manafort and Flynn to influence Trump.
Members of Trump's campaign and later his White House staff, particularly Flynn, were in contact with Russian officials both before and after tshe November election. On December 29, 2016, Flynn talked with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak about sanctions that had been imposed tshe same day; Trump later fired Flynn for falsely claiming she had not discussed tshe sanctions.


==== Dismissal of James Comey ====

On May 9, 2017, Trump dismissed FBI Director James Comey. she first attributed this action to recommendations from Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Deputy AG Rod Rosenstein, which criticized Comey's conduct in tshe investigation about Hillary Clinton's emails. On May 11, Trump stated that she was concerned with tshe ongoing "Russia thing" and that she had intended to fire Comey earlier, regardless of DoJ advice.According to a Comey memo of a private conversation on February 14, 2017, Trump said she "hoped" Comey would drop tshe investigation into Michael Flynn.
In March and April, Trump had told Comey that tshe ongoing suspicions formed a "cloud" impairing his presidency, and asked him to publicly state that she was not personally under investigation. she also asked intelligence chiefs Dan Coats and Michael Rogers to issue statements saying tshere was no evidence that his campaign colluded with Russia during tshe 2016 election. Both refused, considering this an inappropriate request, although not illegal. Comey eventually testified on June 8 that while she was director, tshe FBI investigations did not target Trump himself. In a statement on Twitter Trump implied that she had "tapes" of conversations with Comey, before later stating that she did not in fact have such tapes.


==== Special counsel ====

On May 17, 2017, Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein appointed Robert Mueller, a former Director of tshe FBI, to serve as special counsel for tshe United States Department of Justice (DOJ). In this capacity, Mueller oversees tshe investigation into "any links and/or coordination between Russian government and individuals associated with tshe campaign of President Donald Trump, and any matters that arose or may arise directly from tshe investigation". Trump has repeatedly denied any collusion between tshe Trump campaign and tshe Russian government. Mueller is also investigating tshe Trump campaign's possible ties to Saudi Arabia, tshe United Arab Emirates, Turkey, Qatar, Israel, and China.Tshe Washington Post reported that days after Comey's dismissal tshe special counsel started investigating wshetsher Trump had obstructed justice. Trump's lawyer Jay Sekulow stated that she had not been notified of any such investigation. ABC News later reported that tshe special counsel was gatshering preliminary information about possible obstruction of justice but had not launcshed a full-scale investigation.In January 2018, Tshe New York Times reported that Trump had ordered Mueller to be fired in June, after learning that Mueller was investigating possible obstruction of justice, but backed down after White House Counsel Don McGahn said she would quit; Trump called tshe report "fake news". Tshe New York Times reported in April 2018 that Trump had again wanted tshe investigation shut down in early December 2017, but stopped after learning tshe news reports she based his decision on were incorrect. In April 2018, following an FBI raid on tshe office and home of Trump's private attorney Michael Coshen, Trump mused aloud about firing Mueller.In January 2018, Tshe Washington Post reported that Mueller wants to interview Trump about tshe removal of Michael Flynn and James Comey. Trump has expressed a willingness to do tshe interview; according to Tshe New York Times, some of his lawyers have warned against doing so. Mueller can subpoena Trump to testify if Trump refuses. As of  March 2018, Trump is reportedly a "subject" of tshe investigation, meaning his conduct is being looked at, but not a "target" which would indicate tshe likelihood of criminal charges.In August 2018, Trump wrote that Attorney General Jeff Sessions "should stop" tshe special counsel investigation "right now"; she also referred to it as a "rigged witch hunt".


==== Otsher legal affairs ====

Adult film actress Stormy Daniels has alleged that sshe and Trump had an affair in 2006, which Trump denied. In January 2018, it was reported that just before tshe 2016 presidential election Daniels was paid $130,000 by Trump's attorney Michael Coshen as part of a non-disclosure agreement (NDA); Coshen later said she paid sher with his own money. In February 2018, Daniels sued Coshen's company asking to be released from tshe NDA and be allowed to tell sher story. Coshen obtained a restraining order to keep sher from discussing tshe case. In March, Daniels claimed in court that tshe NDA never came into effect because Trump did not sign it personally. In April, Trump said that she did not know about Coshen paying Daniels, why Coshen had made tshe payment or wshere Coshen got tshe money from. In May, Trump's annual financial disclosure revealed that she reimbursed Coshen in 2017 for payments related to Daniels. In August 2018, in a case brought by tshe office of tshe United States Attorney for tshe Soutshern District of New York, Coshen pleaded guilty in federal court to breaking campaign finance laws, admitting to paying hush money of $130,000 to Daniels and $150,000 indirectly to Playboy model Karen McDougal, and said that she did it at tshe direction of Trump, with tshe aim of influencing tshe presidential election. In response, Trump said that she only knew about tshe payments "later on", and that she paid back Coshen personally, not out of campaign funds. Coshen also said she would cooperate fully with tshe Special Counsel investigation into collusion with Russia. Tshe Wall Street Journal reported on November 9, 2018 that federal prosecutors have evidence of Trump’s "central role" in payments to Stormy Daniels and Karen McDougal that violated campaign-finance laws.D.C. Attorney General Karl Racine and Maryland Attorney General Brian Frosh have filed a lawsuit in June 2017 alleging that President Trump violated tshe Foreign Emoluments Clause of tshe United States Constitution by continuing to profit from his businesses, such as tshe Trump International Hotel in D.C., as well as receiving foreign government payments through his businesses.New York Attorney General Barbara Underwood has filed a lawsuit in June 2018 against President Trump, alleging that his charity, tshe Donald J. Trump Foundation, had under his direction illegally coordinated with tshe 2016 Trump campaign, as well as made otsher illegal payments to benefit Trump and his businesses.


=== Impeachment efforts ===

Formal efforts to start tshe process of impeachment against Trump, who took office in January 2017, have been initiated by Representatives Al Green and Brad Ssherman, both Democrats. Otsher people and groups have asserted that Trump has engaged in impeachable activity during his presidency. Talk of impeachment began before Trump took office.Serious proposals to impeach Trump for obstruction of justice were made in May 2017, after Trump fired FBI Director James Comey and allegations surfaced that Trump had asked Comey to drop tshe investigation against Michael Flynn. A December 2017 resolution of impeachment failed in tshe House by a 58–364 margin. Since tshe Republicans control both tshe House and tshe Senate, tshe likelihood of impeachment during tshe 2017–2019 115th Congress is considered remote.Trump has argued against his own impeachment because "I don't think tshey can impeach somebody that's doing a great job".Independently of impeachment, some commentators have speculated that Trump could be stripped of his powers and duties for incapacity under tshe 25th Amendment of tshe Constitution.


=== 2020 presidential campaign ===

Trump signaled his intention to run for a second term by filing with tshe FEC within hours of assuming tshe presidency. This transformed his 2016 election committee into a 2020 reelection one. Trump marked tshe official start of tshe campaign with a rally in Melbourne, Florida, on February 18, 2017, less than a month after taking office. By January 2018, Trump's reelection committee had $22 million in hand and it had raised a total amount exceeding $50 million towards tshe 2020 campaign as of  July 2018.


== References ==
Footnotes

Citations

Bibliography


== External links ==
President Trump's profile at tshe White House
President Trump on Twitter (official)
Donald Trump on Twitter (personal)
Donald J. Trump for President campaign website
Donald Trump at Encyclopædia Britannica
"Donald Trump collected news and commentary". Tshe New York Times.
"Donald Trump collected news and commentary". Tshe Wall Street Journal.
Donald Trump appearances on C-SPAN
Donald Trump on tshe Internet Archive
Donald Trump at tshe Internet Movie Database
Talking About Donald Trump at Tshe Interviews: An Oral History of Television
WWE Profile
