World war 2, which is also knows as the second world war, was a war which happened all over the world.
Almost all countries were in it, specially the big countries. There were two major alliances, the axis and the allies. The entire world was in a state of war.
Over 100.000.000 people were involved from over 30 countries.
The major participants in the war was Germany and the Soviet union.
The war begun on the first of September 1939 and ended in 1945.
Germany invaded many countries and many Jews, gays etc. was killed throughout the war.
The political way of thinking and the social structure were dramatically changed because of world war 2.
The leader of the german army was Adolf Hitler. He also participated in world war 1.

The Italian invasion:
The war here began with a small invasion of the Ethiopian empire, this was done by Italy.

Spanish civil war:
Hitler and Mussolini gave out their military to nationalist rebels. These nationalist rebels were led by Francisco Franco.


Batman:
Batman is a superhero from DC comics. He was created by Bob Kane.
Batman hides as a man named Bruce Wayne, he is a rich playboy from America and owns the company Wayne Enterprises.
When he was a child he witnesses his parents murder.
The name of his parents were Thomas Wayne and Martha Wayne. Because of this murder Batman has sworn to defeat all criminals and get rid of all crime.
The way Bruce trains is by training himself in martial arts.
He have many enemies such as the scarecrow, poison ivy, bane, Harley Quinn and so on, but the biggest enemy of the all are the Joker.

Batman has many different supporting characters, such as Robin and James Gordon.

World war II.
World War II (often abbreviated to WWII or WW2), also known as the Second World War, was a global war that lasted from 1939 to 1945. The vast majority of the world's countries including all the great powers?eventually formed two opposing military alliances: the Allies and the Axis. A state of total war emerged, directly involving more  
Kane signed away ownership in the character in exchange for, among other compensation, a mandatory byline on all Batman comics. This byline did not originally say "Batman created by Bob Kane"; his name was simply written on the title page of each story. The name disappeared from the comic book in the mid 1960s, replaced by credits for each story's actual writer and artists. In the late 1970s, when Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster began receiving a "created by" credit on the Superman titles, along with William Moulton Marston being given the byline for creating Wonder Woman, Batman stories began saying "Created by Bob Kane" in addition to the other credits.
than 100 million people from over 30 countries. The major participants threw their entire economic, industrial, and scientific capabilities behind the war effort, blurring the distinction between civilian and military resources. World War II was the deadliest conflict in human history, marked by 50 to 85 million fatalities, most of whom were civilians in the Soviet Union and China. It included massacres, the genocideof the Holocaust, strategic bombing, premeditated death from starvation and disease, and the only use of nuclear weapons in war.[1][2][3][4]
The start of the war in Europe is generally held to be 1 September 1939,[9][10] beginning with the German invasion of Poland; the United Kingdom and France declared war on Germany two days later. The dates for the beginning of war in the Pacific include the start
 number of features make this protected intersection. A corner refuge island, a setback crossing of the pedestrians and cyclists, generally between 1.5 7 metres of setback, a forward stop bar, which allows cyclists to stop for a traffic light well ahead of motor traffic who must stop behind the crosswalk. Separate signal staging or at least an advance green for cyclists and pedestrians is used to give cyclists and pedestrians no conflicts or a head start over traffic. The design makes a right turn on red, and sometimes left on red depending on the geometry of the intersection in question, possible in many cases, often without 
This will usually mean that turning traffic must stop and wait for a breach to turn, and this might cause inconvenience for drivers that follow them but do not want to turn. This is why dedicated lanes and protected traffic signals for turning are sometimes provided. On busier intersections where a protected lane would be ineffective or cannot be built, turning may be entirely prohibited, and drivers will be required to "drive around the block" in order to accomplish the turn. Many cities employ this tactic quite often; in San Francisco, due to its common practice, making three right turns is known colloquially as a "San Francisco left turn". Likewise, as many intersections in Taipei City are too busy to allow direct left turns, signs often direct drivers to drive around the block to turn.
Turning rules are by no means universal. For example, in New Zealand (a drive-on-the-left country) between 1977 and 2012, left turning traffic had to give way to opposing right-turning traffic wishing to take the same road (unless there were multiple lanes, but then one must take care in case a vehicle jumped lanes). New Zealand abolished this particular rule on 25 March 2012, except at roundaboutsor when denoted by a Give Way or Stop sign.[6] Although the rule caused initial driver confusion, and many intersections required or still require modification,[7] the change is predicted to eventually prevent one death and 13 serious injuries annually.