The second world war began in 1939 and ended in 1945. The war consisted of Germany starting a global war against many other countries. Germany had an agenda of removing impure people from the country and only allowing worthy people to live there. Some of these unworthy people were Jews, gays and so on. 
Germany were led by the nazis with Adolf Hitler in front. The war lasted 6 years in resulted in invasion of many countries, for example Denmark. During the war Germany used many war machines such as tanks and boats.
Boats are a vessel used to sail the sea, there are many types of boats such as Sailbot, manowar, destroyer and so on.
A ship can sail on water and can by using the win in its sails or by having a motor which allows the boat to move forward. Some boats also use both types.
Boats have been used for many things throughout history, such as war, fishing, transportation and exploration. The different types of boats therefore have different uses.

Dc comics has made many comics throughout history, such as Superman, batman, wonder woman, aquaman and many many more. Some of these heroes, especially the ones mentioned, formed the group the justice league, which fights crime together.
Superman comes from another planet and gets his powers because of solar radiation.
Batmans parents died when he was a child, which is why he wants to defeat all crime. He gets his powers through technology, which he buys and invents with all the money he got from his parents and made through his company Wayne enterprises.

Four lions is a movie about a group of terrorists who wants to do some suicide bombing.

There are many religions in the world, for example catholism where people believe in god, which created the earth and everything in it.  God is the almighty being which created everything and has the power to take away everything again. People who believe in this also believe in Heaven and hell, Heaven is the place you go to if you have been good your entire life, where eternal joy awaits.
Hell is the opposite place where evil people go in order to make up for all their sins. Here they are tortured for all eternity.
People who believe in God also believes in Angels. Angels are mythological creatures which are created by God in order to do his work, they are often seen as humans with wings.
There are some archangels which stands above the angels, for example Gabriel.

Finally lets talk about some animals.
I once knew a guy who had a mouse, a mouse is a small animal in the rodent family. 
Titanic was a ship, large boat, which was very large for its time. It was said to be unsinkable, however it sank on its first journey.
The white house is a place in America, USA, where the president lives and works.

